# Wilson-Lab
Code re. counting orthogonal transcription factor combinations.

This repository has a MATLAB script (TFCombinationsCount) and a set of helper functions that allow the user to count orthogonal transcription factor (TF) combinations given a number of operator/TFs and a set of repression matrices (e.g. "An Emerging Transcriptional Programming Edifice: Leveraging an Engineered System of Transcription Factors and Genetic Architectures", Figure 2).

Stepping through TFCombinationsCount, on line 5 the user chooses the number of TFs to include in all combinations considered in the calculation (currently configured for 2, 3 and 4 only; see details below), stored as numberOfTFs. 'Xs' designates whether to include the Xs phenotype in the calculation; 1 for yes, 0 for no. 'antilac' designates whether to include the antilac phenotype in the calculation; 1 for yes, 0 for no. 'Combinatorial' designates whether the calculation should reject variations in TF and operator repression strength (see below) (1 for yes, 0 for no). 'Permutational' designates whether the calculation should include variations in TF strength, and 'operatorDiff' in tandem with permutational designates whether the calculation should include variations in operator strength (see below) (1 for yes, 0 for no). Either combinatorial or permutational, but not both, should be set to 1. 

The 'TFinputsRec' helper function feeds in repression matrix data. Functional phenotypes are input as '1's, nonfunctional as '0's. These inputs can be customized for any repression matrices (so long as the user is prepared to debug simple errors this causes in the code, since it's customized to 7x7 matrices for this study). 

The 'XsInputsRec' helper function adds in Xs phenotypes to the repression matrices.

The 'GetTFsets' helper function feeds in the combinatorial groupings of numberOfTFs TFs. These were solved by hand and entered manually, and these groupings reject TFs that are inducible by the same ligand. This can be extended for any number of TFs, but currently only allows for groupings of 2, 3, or 4 TFs. 

The code then steps through each repression matrix entry in the first TF from TFset from GetTFsets and compares it to every repression matrix entry in the second TF from TFset. The code rejects any non-orthogonal groupings which can occur if the TFs bind to the same operator (i.e. if any of the entries on their respective columns overlap by row). Accepted groupings are stored in a 3D cell array with each layer specific to a TFsets entry, and the total number of rows in the cell array at the end of the calculation is the number of TF combinations given the input parameters. Further details are annotated in the code.


Some further details from the Supplemental Information of "An Emerging Transcriptional Programming Edifice: Leveraging an Engineered System of Transcription Factors and Genetic Architectures" (see SI for associated figures and table):

To better understand the number of unique TF/operator groupings enabled by our chimeric set of TFs, we have performed combinatorial and permutational analyses of the operator architectures presented in this paper (SERI, PARA, SERI [PARA] hAND, and the master circuit, SERI [PARA] SERI). For the purposes of these calculations, we consider only those circuits wherein (1) each TF interacts with only one operator, and no other TF interacts with that operator, and (2) only one gene is under control of these operators (even if there are multiple copies of that gene under control, as in the PARA architecture). The number of unique combinations for each operator architecture, phenotype selection, and starting assumptions is presented in Table S1.

Using different starting assumptions allows us to focus on different aspects of the scale of possible circuit configurations using our chimeric TF set. A combinatorial analysis takes into account two additional assumptions: (1) that all TFs have equal repression strength, induction strength, and dynamic range, and (2) that operators all have equal repression strength. These assumptions reveal the number of uniquely ligand- and operator-orthogonal TF combinations that can be constructed for a given number of operator sites, without regard to resulting circuit performance. Permutational analysis A gives a better picture of the scope of the circuit design space because it takes into account differences in TF repression strength. Permutational analysis B takes into account both TF repression strength and operator repression strength, and these differences allow for tunable circuit performance and better represent the inherent variability in performance across unique TFs and operator positions.

Counting the number of unique TF/operator groupings from our dataset is achieved using a custom MATLAB script and set of helper functions available as SI Code 1. The user sets the number of TFs/operators, which phenotypes to include in the calculation, and whether the calculation should be combinatorial or permutational. The function then steps through each possible combination of RCDs given that TF/operator number and the repression matrices fed in (the repression matrices from this current work (shown in Figure 2) are fed in by default), and within those combinations compares individual TFs (i.e., RCD+ADR+operator). The code rejects any non-orthogonal groupings, which can occur if the TFs bind to the same operator or the TFs respond to the same ligand. Accepted groupings are stored in a cell array, and the total number of rows in the cell array at the end of the calculation is the number of TF combinations given the input parameters.

The availability of three functional phenotypes in our dataset expands the range of analog circuit logic that can be constructed for each operator architecture. As shown in Figure S11, two-operator architectures (both SERI and PARA) allow for five basic analog logic operations, three-operator architectures of the type shown in Figure 5 allow for 12 basic analog logic operations, and four-operator architectures (SERI [PARA] SERI) allow for 9 basic analog logic operations. In addition, a much broader range of circuits with unique expression control and logic can be achieved by well-known techniques for fine-tuning circuit parameters, such as operator strengths, operator positions, plasmid copy number, distinct operators controlling different genes, translational feedback (of the type shown in Figure 5b-d), etc..
